Now, there’s much for us
to think about in these words
of Proverbs 12:18.
And all of us, we like to think
of ourselves as wise.
But we all know that from time to time
we still stab our brothers and sisters
with our speech—thoughtless speech.
Now, we all know
that we need to watch our speech
—say things that are positive or upbuilding.
But isn’t it true that sometimes
we may find that we have ourselves
in a negative thinking pattern
that we cannot get out of and that exhibits
itself in our speech?
Well, what can help us?
Well, you notice our theme scripture
at Proverbs 12:18 says,
‘The tongue of a wise person is a healing.’
So, what can help us to be wise?
What can help us
to have healing and positive speech?
Well, let’s consider
three things this morning.
The first is:
Wise persons maintain perspective.
Now, sometimes we may find
that our speech is negative or cutting
because we’re frustrated.
But yet stepping back and looking
at things from a broader perspective,
many times can help us to be wise
—to control our tongue.
Now, in this context,
many times I think about Job.
When we look at Job’s words,
we find that he really said
some hurtful things.
At Job 40:2,
Jehovah calls Job a “faultfinder.”
Job was finding fault with Jehovah.
Why?
Well, from Job’s perspective,
an injustice was being done.
In fact, turn, if you will, to Job chapter 9,
and just notice some of the things
that Job says about Jehovah.
At Job 9:15-18, just skimming through there,
you’ll notice in verse 15, he says:
“Even if I were in the right,
I would not answer him.”
Verse 18:
‘If I call out to him, will he answer me?
I do not believe
he’ll even listen to my voice.’
Verse 17:
“He crushes me with a storm.”
Verse 18:
“He does not let me catch my breath.”
Look at verses 34 and 35;
Job says of Jehovah:
“If he would [just] stop beating me . . . ,
then I would speak to him unafraid.”
Why, these words are stabs of a sword,
stinging criticism of Jehovah.
But now, what helped Job
to correct his thinking
and, therefore,
again to have positive speech?
It was perspective.
Remember, Jehovah pulled him back
to see things from a different perspective.
And how we think of the words there
and His questions in Job chapter 38,
where Jehovah said: ‘Well, Job,
let me ask you a few questions now.
‘Can you remind me again,
‘where was it you were at when
I created the earth?
‘I don’t remember seeing you anywhere.
‘Or, who commands the morning?
‘Or, Job, let me ask you,
where does light come from?
‘Ideas?
Ideas?
I didn’t think so.’
See, what was Jehovah doing?
See, Jehovah was pulling Job back
to see things from a broader perspective.
It allowed him to see his issues in context.
And what was the result?
Well, at Job 42:3, he said:
“I spoke without understanding.”
In verse 6, he said:
‘Can you just take back everything I said;
just erase what I said.’
What’s the point?
Well, the point is that meditating
on a broader perspective
can help us to have positive speech.
See, we have to remember
that it’s not all about us.
The world does not revolve around us.
There are bigger issues at play,
and that perspective can help us to be wise.
It can help us to control our speech.
Now, a second point
is that a wise person is humble.
Notice what a wise person will do.
Look at Proverbs 1:5.
Proverbs 1:5 says: “A wise person listens
and takes in more instruction.”
Now, it takes humility to listen.
Now, we contrast that with Proverbs 18:2.
Proverbs 18:2 says: “A stupid person
takes no pleasure in understanding;
he would rather disclose
what is in his heart.”
You see, a stupid person,
he doesn’t have time to listen.
He already knows what the story
is and therefore speaks accordingly.
Well, am I a wise or a stupid person?
Well, see, humility will help us to realize
that we do not always have the whole story;
we don’t always have all the facts.
And when we listen
and we get a full perspective,
many times that changes our thinking.
How many times has that happened to you?
I know it’s happened to me.
That once we step back
and we hear the whole story,
we realize we didn’t know
what we were talking about.
We weren’t speaking out of wisdom,
but rather out of ignorance.
And see, that realization and that humility
will then help us do what it says
here at Proverbs 17:27.
Notice what a wise person does.
“A man of knowledge restrains his words,
and a discerning man will remain calm.”
So, what’s the point?
Well, the point is:
Humility can help us to be wise.
Humble people listen to others,
therefore realizing
that they don’t have all the facts.
And that helps us to restrain our words,
to remain calm, and to be wise.
Now, our third point is
that a wise person is realistic.
And we have to be careful
that we do not overthink things at times.
You see, in this organization we have
just absolutely brilliant
brothers and sisters.
Many of you can look at a situation
and see how to straighten it out
and make it faster, smoother,
better, more efficient.
And that is a gift,
but we have to be careful
that we do not overthink things.
See, sometimes we may look
at something and say,
‘Well, you know, that is the most ridiculous
process I’ve ever seen in my life.’
And you know what?
Maybe it is.
But we cannot optimize everything.
We’ll only end up frustrating ourselves,
which will cause us to be cynical,
which ends up coming out in our speech.
Now, I find the book of Ecclesiastes
of much benefit,
as it carries realistic thinking.
Look at Ecclesiastes 2:15.
Ecclesiastes 2:15 says:
“Then I said in my heart:
“ ‘What happens to the stupid one
will also happen to me.’
“What, then, did I gain
by becoming excessively wise? . . .
‘This too is futility.’ ’’
You see, we may have a better solution.
Good.
Share it.
Share it with our oversight—be wise.
But Solomon is reminding us,
‘Do not be “excessively wise.” ’
Do not become so fixated
on it that we start to become bitter,
which comes out in our speech.
As we’ve heard before,
we cannot expect perfection
from an imperfect process
where imperfect people are involved.
If we expect that, we’ll only end up
frustrating ourselves and others.
We also remember that anyone
can complain about an imperfect process.
That’s easy to do; all of us can do that.
But the real gem of a person
—the one that can be used
the most by Jehovah—
is the one who can take
an imperfect process and make it work.
Now, along that line, we may think of Jesus.
He could have spent his last
three and a half years of life here on earth
complaining to Jehovah, couldn’t he?
See, he could have complained
about the imperfect men
that he had to work with.
He could have complained about the failed
religious structure that was in place.
He could have complained that he
didn’t even have a decent place to live.
‘Why, foxes and birds live better than I do.’
He could have complained about the flaws
in the temple arrangement and the synagogue.
There are many things that Jesus
could have complained about,
and he could have become bitter.
This would have reflected
itself in his speech.
But he didn’t do that.
See, Jesus is a beautiful example
of taking an imperfect process
and still making it a success
—making it work.
And so, therefore,
this helped him to be positive,
this helped him to speak
in a way that others said:
“Never has another man spoken like this.”
So, what’s the point?
Well, the point is that perspective,
humility, and being realistic
—this can help us to be wise
and this can help us
to have healing and positive speech
with our dear brothers and sisters
that we work with and we live with.